Can we jump to the next one? Yeah, just jump to the- I've been sitting on this
committee for a while.
Possibly. Mm-hmm.
I think. We're acquiring to- Did you- ...
marijuana use
I found it-
Mr. Chair, we-
... really interesting
... don't have Jess at the moment.
Good
morning, Bridget. Please take the center seat.
Good morning. Thank you.
Good to have you here. Thank you for-
Thanks
... making yourself available.
No problem at all.
We have you in here for 10 minutes.
Yeah. Yes.
I'm Sam Uffindell, chair of the Health Committee.
You'll know members around the table.
Thank you very much.
Pleasure to have you here. So I'll let you
lead off, make some remarks. If you want to leave us time for questions at the end,
that would be appreciated.
So I think from the outset-- Yeah, thank you.
I think from the outset, what I'd like to say is we were told we were here as
witnesses to the hearing this morning rather than presenting.
Oh, yeah.
So I haven't prepared a formal presentation, but I'm happy to read through the
notes that I've brought with me.
Please.
That's...
Yeah, that's fine.
Yeah. Is that all right?
A quick summary rather than reading.
Quick summary.
Yeah, sure.
And then a bit of time.
So as you have heard previously,
women are diagnosed with ovarian
cancer at the rate of about 320 per year,
and around 200 women die each year from ovarian
cancer.
So Māori and Pacific women have a higher rate of diagnosis,
and European women are more likely to be diagnosed at a younger
age.
Sorry.
Excuse me. I rushed down the hill this morning.
Do you need some water?
Actually, that would be lovely.
Thank you. I was running late for the hearing this morning.
So Māori are 21% more likely to die of ovarian cancer than
non-Māori. It's challenging to diagnose, as symptoms are
often subtle and nonspecific, and because, thank you,
there's no reliable screening test.
Many cases are discovered at an advanced stage, and as a result,
only 50% of women survive for five years once
diagnosed.
So the State of Ovarian Cancer report was published in 2025, and the
report
provided an updated national snapshot of ovarian cancer outcomes and
system performance. And it identifies ongoing
challenges across the care pathway, including late diagnosis,
unequal access to specialist care, workforce shortages, data gaps,
and limited access to internationally available treatment and clinical
trials. And the work that's being done across the health system
currently aims to address each of those things.
So one of the pieces of work that the Cancer Control Agency led last year was the
development of an optimal cancer care pathway for ovarian cancer,
and Health New Zealand is working through the stages at the moment to implement
each of the recommendations along that pathway.
In addition, there are a range of initiatives being led through Health New
Zealand's workforce strategy that will address some of the issues that are
identified in the
State of Ovarian Cancer report.
Let me just have a
wee look at the list of actions that I was provided.
Increasing the gyneoncologist workforce, which has been a particular issue that has
impacted ovarian cancer. Developing
primary care information pathways, and also
improving access to diagnostic ultrasounds for symptomatic women,
and public and clinician awareness of ovarian cancer
signs and symptoms.
One of the other initiatives that's been proposed is the development of an ovarian
cancer-specific register, which would
require some significant funding as an individual standalone
register. And some of the advice that we've previously
provided is that an integrated approach to data collation
across the cancer system is more effective
for long-term
data collation purposes rather than taking individual
cancer-specific registries.
It would take quite a lot of replication of resource.
Thank you.
Oh, sorry. Just for when you're finished.
Oh, sure. Quite a lot of replication of
resource if we were to undertake individual
data registries for different cancer types.
Now, let me just have a wee look. Oh,
ultrasound funding,
investment of radiology has been a significant
pathway for investment
that will be relevant for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer.
And additionally, one of the initiatives that's been proposed
is to ensure that public awareness of ovarian cancer
symptoms are increased because they can be quite nonspecific
and can be challenging to diagnose.
There has been some suggestion around integrating that with cervical
cancer screening. But one of the issues that
may arise from that is some confusion around what cervical cancer screening
achieves, because apparently,
statistics and research internationally indicates that some
women do believe that screening for cervical cancer will also screen for ovarian
cancer.
Excellent. Thank you. Ingrid?
Oh, two things. Thanks very much for that information.
Take your point about the register, and I know that the Ovarian Cancer
Foundation were very keen on that when they-
Yes
... presented at Parliament. Isn't the
distinction with ovarian cancer that it is actually a collection of cancers, and
therefore that would warrant perhaps different treatment than just saying it's a
unique individual specific one that should belong to a
broader data set because there are so many variations?
To be honest, I think what they're wanting to achieve with the
registry is collation of accurate statistics
around data associated specifically with
ovarian cancer. I'm not sure it's about having a range of different cancer types
in there.
But when they presented on the night, it was clear that one of the issues and
problems with ovarian cancer is it presents very differently, often in
stage four, and it involves multiple different forms of cancer.
And my understanding of the presentation was that was why they wanted the
unique data set for them. But I'll leave that, and perhaps you could give us some
advice.
Yeah. I'll come back. Yes, thank you for the question. I will come back to you.
I wasn't aware that that was a specific issue in terms of the conversations they've
had with the Cancer Control Agency around data
collation and collection. But let me check into that and come back to you, Ingrid.
Thank you. The second point was just the really high number of women who do
present at stage four.
Yes.
And
understanding, you talked about the confusion between
screening for cervical and ovarian.
Are there overseas models where
they actually do screen together so that the confusion
is something that is a positive rather than a negative and able
to get screening happening?
Unfortunately,
there is no screening for ovarian cancer.
Women do have to present with symptoms, and
so there isn't an international model that we're aware of that would achieve
that. I think what's important is that we don't
develop a situation where the public
interpretation of what cervical cancer screening will achieve
is made more confusing, because I think that's
the picture.
Even with simple questions regarding symptomatic things
externally that could be asked assertively at a screening test, for example.
Has that been investigated?
I think that's a very reasonable approach, probably at a primary care interface,
not necessarily associated with cervical cancer, although that's something that
could be looked into. At the moment, there isn't evidence of the
best approach coming out of international research, so we're waiting
for that sort of evidence to be available.
Thank you.
Damian. Yes.
Chair. Thank you. I note your numbers and
numbers of women that die within 48 hours.
If we look at all of the cancers-
Mm-hmm
... and all the death rates based on cancer, where does
ovarian cancer sit on that?
We have around 30,000 people
diagnosed with cancer every year.
Yeah.
And I believe that this is the eighth most common diagnosed cancer for
women.
So,
I think-
Eighth for women, not eighth overall? Yeah.
For women, yes.
Okay.
And I think the thing that is particularly unique about ovarian cancer is, as
we discussed, is the fact that because it is
diagnosed so late, often the treatment options are reduced.
Yes.
And so what we need to address is the early diagnosis.
So, largely that'll be addressed through public awareness,
primary care awareness.
Access to-
Right
... ultrasound scanning and diagnosis is going to be critically important,
and that comes down to a lot of the initiatives underway in terms of strengthening
workforce-
Yeah
... both across the radiology sector and across the treatment sector.
Okay.
Jan.
And in terms of
no screening program, because I'm just clarifying that's what you said.
There's no screening program in the world that-
No. Let me double-check, but my understanding is that there isn't
any way to
effectively screen for ovarian cancer.
It does come down to symptomatic presentation.
And it's that first interaction with primary care.
Mm-hmm.
How much
training do GPs get in
ovarian cancer? I know my doctor has been excellent around breast
cancer and-
Yeah
... cervical screening, all those sorts of things.
We've never had a discussion with her about ovarian cancer.
I think it's not something that's usually
initiated by a GP specifically. It's often largely
in response to the symptoms that a woman presents with.
Right.
But because
a woman of any age can be affected by ovarian cancer, sometimes the
symptoms, because they're rather vague and nonspecific, can be
misinterpreted as being potentially irritable bowel syndrome or
some other condition that might produce similar symptoms.
So is there more training need... Sorry, this is your last one.
Is there more training needed at that primary care level to-
I think it's around awareness. I think the nonspecific symptom
issue in cancer is
acknowledged as a significant issue.
Some cancers do present with quite vague symptoms, and so
developing awareness of what those symptoms might mean is
critically important.
For the patient or for the doctor?
For the doctor, I think, and also primary care practitioners-
Yeah
... nurses and-
Yeah.
Yeah. We're out of time, but go one more. Damian.
Just very briefly. You said a lot of money would be required for a database, and I
guess the question of where you spend the money, it's always prioritization.
Yeah. That's correct.
And the database would be, I guess, as part of a long-term strategy.
Yeah.
But actually in the short term, where would that money be better spent, do you
think?
Well,
there's so many different places
that an investment of that magnitude could be spent in cancer and across the
health system generally. I think-The thing
about developing an integrated data
registry is that the investment is seen over a
long period of time because you
then get the benefit from that over an extended period of time.
The issue is quite a lot of digital infrastructure is required in order to
kick that off, and so I think that's where that prioritization that
you mentioned comes in. Yeah.
Great. Thank you very much both-
I apologize that I wasn't-
For your comments today
... more prepared at the outset. Thank you for your time.
Okay. Thank you.
And I'm coming back with one question. Will someone follow up with me?
Should we take that now?
Thank you, sir.
We'll get the data, the cancer database system.
All right. We'll move back to Surbhi, please.
There's no trick.
Good
morning.
Good morning.
Is it Jas or?
Yes, Jas.
Yes. Jas, welcome to the Health Committee. I'm Sam Attenborough.
You see members around the table here with their name tags.
We have you in here for 10 minutes to speak to your petition.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may, but that time is all
yours. So I'll hand that over to you now. Thank you.
Perfect. First, I just want to apologize for being late. I'm so sorry.
It's fine.
But, yeah. Anyway, thank you so much for being here.
I know your time is very valuable. So, yeah.
I just wanted to outline my petition briefly and then kind of
give you three main points to take away from this.
So the petition asks for the House of Representatives to improve
affordability and accessibility of neurodiversity assessments in New Zealand.
This is an issue that's quite personal to me,
and through sharing my personal experiences, I
learned how widespread it is.
Yeah. And so neurodiversity, in case people aren't familiar,
is a normal variation in brain function,
where it includes conditions like ADHD,
autism, dyslexia, dyspraxia, Tourette
syndrome.
Yeah, and so it's estimated there's hundreds of thousands of kids
and young people out there in New Zealand
alone, not including the adult population.
And so it is a really big, widespread experience.
So, I just want to talk about my personal experience.
So, when I was younger, I felt very different.
I always tried really hard. I was really into school.
I loved school. I loved sport. I was very academic.
But throughout high school, I got quite burnt out.
Gradually, it led to me having severe depression,
anxiety, and an eating disorder.
It really had a pointy end in year 13, where I was hospitalized many
times due to suicidality or trying to take my own life, and that
continued for a few years. Unfortunately and
fortunately, through social media, I realized that I might have
ADHD,
and it was linking a few dots that have never been linked before.
They were having trouble with my treatment, and they thought I just wasn't trying
hard enough when really I wanted to get back to how I was.
And I loved school, I loved sport, and I wanted to get back to that.
At age 21,
after a year of being on a wait list, and frankly, money I couldn't afford, I used
my course-related costs. I was diagnosed with ADHD and, to
my surprise as well, autism,
which really changed the stereotypes in my head around what
autism was.
Once I was able to access the proper support and treatment,
I thrived really. There was an instant change.
Medication was incredible for me, but might not be for
all. My mental health improved drastically.
I skyrocketed to As in university quite easily
due to what seemed like a small change but was actually
life-changing and probably life-saving.
Many young people aren't as fortunate.
They don't quite make it to that diagnosis.
Or people reach adulthood and realize when their
brain is fully developed, and they can't change those neural pathways.
So,
that's kind of why I'm here. And through my sharing of
experience,
I realized that this problem is quite broad.
And yeah, so my first takeaway for this committee
is
moving on from the GPs being allowed to diagnose and prescribe.
I think that was a really good change, but there hasn't been enough
support for GPs and the systems in place to make sure it's safe.
So,
yeah, it has potential to significantly improve the reduced pressure
that previously only psychiatrists were able to do.
But
GPs are often, after talking to some, they
feel that they want to opt out because the guidelines are unclear.
They feel uncomfortable,
and they want to do what's right and practice safely.The
patients don't know who to go to where it's safe.
So for my diagnosis, I did it privately and went back to my public
psychiatrist, and he told me that autism can only be in boys
once I got the diagnosis, and that I couldn't possibly have ADHD because I was
sitting in a chair.
And so for someone to tell me that who was in the medical
area was
gutting, to be completely honest.
And so whether we like it or not, there are people with those opinions out in
the GP world. And it's important for people to know
who's safe to go to and who feels comfortable practicing in that area.
My second point is around,
which I've kind of covered slightly, but just really
emphasizing a clear guideline for
consumers and allowing
them to see where it is safe to
go for assessments and know that they're going to get a sound
and safe assessment. And then the
last point is,
while this is tackling the addressing ADHD assessments,
we need to look more broadly at other neurodivergent conditions.
It's very rare that someone only has ADHD.
Often they have another neurodivergence at least, and then also
other areas,
like mental health issues, chronic pain conditions,
gastrointestinal issues. So I think it's really important that we
take a broad lens when clinically appropriate.
And so getting some advice on that would be crucial.
But yeah, in closing, I just want to make sure no one else falls through the
cracks. This is a matter of life and death sometimes.
And so it's really important that we
take the time to look at this. So yeah, thank you.
It's a really good submission.
Thank you.
Damien.
Thank you for the submission. It's really interesting.
And where do you think the best place or the best time
in,
I guess, your life would have been to intervene or to investigate?
And would there have been early years or teenage years
or?
The earlier the better. I think from research you can diagnose someone with autism
around the ages of two to three.
While sometimes it's harder and that's later on, but definitely in that primary
school age, and same with ADHD.
The other thing that is difficult, but obviously needs tackling, is
females present differently to males, and in the diagnostic manual, it's
focused on the male brain. So females tend to be less hyperactive and
more
inattentive. And autism also looks very different, which
is why I was so shocked when I got diagnosed with autism as well, was that
it looks very different. And so,
in summary, primary school is really where we need to be looking.
But particularly looking at making sure that females are also
included in that picture.
Thank you.
Ingrid, Andrew, Jenny, and Hamish.
Thanks for sharing your story, Jas, which as a medicated ADHD
person I can relate to. I think there was an expectation
that the floodgates would open when doctors were able to diagnose, but
it's a very time-consuming process.
What difference would it make if there was resourcing for doctors to be able to
do the training and also not pass on the costs to families, in your
view?
Yeah, I think it will definitely open a door to those who can't afford private
healthcare. And yeah, GPs being able
to diagnose
would just open the door drastically to people
who can't access that healthcare I've got. I work in the education sector as well.
I've had students who have flown to Auckland, to Christchurch from Dunedin to be
able to get a diagnosis. And so definitely for those who can't afford that, I think
it would be-
Jenny
... life-changing.
Thank you, Jas.
Yeah, no worries.
Really
moving story that you've shared with us.
I hope you don't mind if I just sort of probe a few more of those.
No, of course.
So I'll just ask that we keep one or two questions.
Yeah.
What I'm wanting to know is, obviously, did you
take the step as a young adult to follow
through with the diagnosis? At what point did your parents,
were they involved in the process?
Or had earlier years there been needs with family?
My parents had no idea.
I took the steps myself. I was an independent student at university,
and to be honest, didn't want to bother my parents at that point.
But when I told them, they were shocked.
They were
unknowingly also probably neurodiverse, because it is genetic.
But yeah, so
they were like, "Oh, you're like us." But yeah.
So, they were really shocked. But yeah.
So it was hard to tell, but yeah.
Hamish.
Excellent, Jas. Wonderful submission.
And I suppose I have a very vague question, and it's something that's probably
bothered me, and I think you actually summed it up very nicely when you say this is
a normal variation in brain function.
Surely one of the challenges is
that kind of spectrum kind of approach, or kind of the blurred
lines of where someone might sit in this
scope of variation.
How do you think we should deal with that?
Because there's going to be people who probably are a little
bit, I suppose if we can use that term, a little bit
neurodiverse. There's no clear cutoff or no clear
diagnosis really for some of these conditions. How do we get around that?
Well, the diagnostic criteria does provide a clear
cutoff. And so there are people who don't meet that threshold, but they have been
told, yes, you're neurodiverse, which also is still really beneficial because it
allows them, they might not meet the criteria for medication, but it allows
them to think, "Okay, my brain is different." It gives that permission to be able
to feel different. But yeah, in the diagnostic criteria, there
are requirements you have to meet, and some don't meet all of them, but they meet
some, and some meet all of them. And that's where a diagnosis occurs.
So
Do you think those criteria are accurate enough given what you've
talked about-
Um
... but different views on males and females and some of the
symptoms?
I'm not a medical professional, so it is hard
for me to say, but
I believe so. I think it's just sometimes medical
professionals with their own personal biases and identifying things that might
be layered beneath. There's more of the difference between males and females.
You've got to ask different questions and dive a little bit deeper
sometimes. But yeah.
Jas, thank you very much for making-
No worries. Pleasure
... the effort to come here and present to the committee today.
Yeah.
We greatly appreciate you having done so.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
You're welcome.